# A Day Inside My Mind : Visualizing Moods Using a Markov Model

## Set Up & Run Instructions
1. In the terminal, clone this repository using git and the repo url.
2. Navigate to the markovDistinction directory (using cd).
3. Run the Python script using 'python main.py'
4. The Turtle Graphics window should pop up and begin creating art

## Project Description
This system uses a transition matrix and the Turtle module to create a visualized walk-through of my mental state over the course of a day. My mood upon waking is determined at random, and the following four moods over the course of the day are determined using probabilities based on the previous state, as is standard in a first order Markov chain. At each mood change, the Turtle module draws the corresponding shape to visually represent that mood, resulting in a piece of art with five shapes representing my head space over the course of the day.

## Personal Meaning
My system is personally meaningful to me because it captures some of the challenges I face with my mental health. While this system is a severely simplified model of my day-to-day feelings, my moods can fluctuate throughout the day. The moods do seem to be related to one another, but often can be traced back to the "side of the bed" I woke up on, which can feel pretty random. Monitoring these mood fluctuations has been a crucial part of my battle with mental health issues and has allowed me to recognize some of the patterns that have led to the probabilities in my system's transition matrix. Turning these processes into pieces of visual art has been therapeutic in a way, and while the bad days can be challenging, seeing each unique piece of art that is generated by this system serves as a powerful analogy that there is beauty even in the hardest days. 

## Challenges and Growth
For this project, I challenged myself to get back to (or learn) basics. This was my first time working in Python since CSCI 1101, and it was a lot of fun to re-learn some of the features of the Turtle module and the syntax of the programming language. Configurng Python to work with the Turtle module proved much more difficult than I anticipated, and it took me a while just to set up the environment properly. Early on in the project, I found open source code for a Markov chain model online, but soon realized its outline would not fit my vision, so I had to scrap it and get back to the drawing board to consider an alternative approach to stepping through a Markov model. Making my code more stylistically appealing was also somewhat of a challenge, and I spent some time trying to eliminate extraneous variables and unnecessary methods for a sleeker product. Finally, navigating GitHub proved my final challenge. I am relatively new to GitHub, and, while it may eventually become a taken-for-granted skill, figuring out the nitty-gritty of creating my first personal repo was exciting and made me feel like a real coder for the first time. In the same vein, this was really the first coding project where I was able to bring self-expression into the mix, and it was fun but also challenging to figure out how to do that and allowing myself to utilize the power of technology to be a little bit vulnerable. 

## Creative? 
Ultimately, I believe my system is a creative one. I make this assertion on the basis of the three characteristics we've discussed that make a computational system creative: novelty, value, and intentionality. My system is novel in that it is unique to me. I chose to represent my own moods with certain shapes and colors that I associate with each feeling. Those associations are unique to me. I chose probabilities for my transition matrix that are unique to my mood transitions. Therefor, the pieces of art produced by this system are uniquely representative of my inner mind, thus checking the box for novelty. My system has value in a personal sense. Not only is it therapeutic, it also could give me insight into long-term mood trends, which could be useful in helping me monitor my mental health. Finally, the system is intentional because it accomplishes what I had hoped it would. It helps me visualize a day inside my own mind based on the educated semi-randomness of my mood transitions. So, using this most basic definition of creativity, I think my system qualifies as such. 

## Source Citations
Peer collaboration: Cara Nunley; Nell Fusco

Online resources: 
https://www.datacamp.com/community/tutorials/markov-chains-python-tutorial; https://docs.python.org/3/library/turtle.html; https://holypython.com/turtle-spirals/
